Algorithmic trading and Direct Market Access (DMA) are important tools for the electronic trading of financial assets.
Nowadays, a bewildering array of assets can be traded electronically. Stocks and bonds, cash, certificates and a variety of derivatives contracts may all be bought and sold just at the push of a button. The technology to achieve this is still relatively new, but the fundamental market mechanics of buying and selling remain the same. Put simply, sellers need to find buyers (and vice-versa) as quickly and efficiently as possible. Corporations and governments issue assets in order to raise the cash (or capital) required to meet their needs. Likewise, investors and speculators must be able to easily buy and sell assets in order to see a return from their capital.
Over time, the world's markets have evolved to accommodate the differing requirements of both the issuers of financial assets and those who invest in them. The ease with which such trading takes place is commonly referred to as liquidity: Highly liquid markets (or assets) are more active and so usually much easier and cheaper to trade in. To improve liquidity, dedicated trading venues, such as exchanges, have often been established.
However, there may not always be a natural buyer or seller to trade with, so markets also rely on intermediaries to "grease the wheels": Specialised traders, or dealers, trade for a set price with the aim of making a short-term profit. Brokers act as agents to place their clients' orders with the dealers, or match them with other clients' orders. Since both brokers and dealers facilitate the issuance and selling of assets they are often referred to as the "sell-side". In turn, institutional investors are often called the "buy-side".
To illustrate the trading process, Figure 1-1 shows some example trade flows from the point of view of an investor. Traditionally, a buy-side initiated trade is placed as an order with a broker's salesperson who must then communicate the order to a trader (or dealer). In turn, the trader would then either quote a price to trade against their own inventory or alternatively work the order on an exchange. This is shown as the pathway labelled A in Figure 1-1. Electronic trading simply offers a means of issuing such orders via computers.
Direct Market Access (DMA) is where brokers allow clients access to their order routing infrastructure, as shown by pathway B. This allows the buy-side to issue their electronic orders almost directly to the exchanges, effectively giving them much the same level of control over an order's execution as a sell-side trader has. Sponsored access takes this to the next level, for clients whose high-frequency trading strategies need ultra-low latency connections. Essentially, this allows clients to connect directly to the market, as shown in pathway E, using the broker's trading identifier, but their own infrastructure. Alternatively. the buy-side can organise membership of the specific market and so have native access.
Algorithmic trading takes a slightly different approach to DMA: A computerised system is responsible for executing the orders to buy or sell a given asset, rather than being worked manually by a trader. So a computer program follows preset rules to determine how each order should be executed. Based on these rules, it splits off portions (or child orders) to send to the market, often tracking market conditions and events. Initially, such trading algorithms were used as a labour-saving device for busy sell-side traders, labelled pathway C in Figure
1-1. As these algorithms became more established, brokers started to offer their buy-side clients direct access to them, shown by pathway D. Together with DMA, allowing clients access to trade on markets in this way is also known as Direct Access Trading.
It is important to note that all of the labelled pathways in Figure 1-1 are only concerned with executing a given order.